So this is the WebObjects
Technical Overview.
And if you attended
the State of the Union,
a lot of the content is
going to seem similar,
but we're going to go in a lot more depth
than you saw in the State of the Union.
And we're going to cover a lot
more parts of the technology.
So what is this session all about?
Well, it's really about power,
because WebObjects is about power.
And this session is about teaching you
how to harness the power of WebObjects
in the applications you write.
But it's also about elegance.
You ask a lot of veteran
WebObjects developers why
they like using WebObjects,
and they say that it's very elegant.
And another reason they like it
is because it's sophisticated.
And the point is not that
WebObjects is sophisticated,
although it is,
but it helps you build sophisticated
applications and allows you to
do really difficult things that
other application development
environments make it very hard to do.
But fundamentally,
WebObjects is about productivity.
You have to write a web application,
so you have to get something done.
And WebObjects helps you get to
market faster and write a better
application the first time.
And WebObjects, once you get it,
it's a lot of fun.
So we're going to hopefully
have some fun today.
So what are you going to learn?
You're going to learn what WebObjects is.
Most of you probably know what it is.
But most importantly,
we're going to show you what
you can do with WebObjects.
And when you think of WebObjects,
you probably think of HTML applications.
But it's really much more than that,
because it's designed
to be very flexible,
very modular,
and so you can target types of
network applications that you
might not know that you can.
So we're going to show
you some unique examples.
And then we're going to
show you how to learn.
And to learn WebObjects,
you need to know about the building
blocks and the tools that you
use to build these applications.
So we're going to look
at each of the tools,
and we're going to look
at each of the frameworks,
of the most important frameworks
in any WebObjects application.
And then we're actually going
to go behind the scenes.
So we're going to go behind the scenes
in running a WebObjects application,
so you can get a sense of the objects
that are involved in that application,
and what your role as a WebObjects
developer is in building those
objects and adding value to the
objects that we provide you.
And throughout the session,
the whole idea is to help you
know and get a sense of how to
start learning this technology.
So, first of all, what is WebObjects?
Well,
if we can come up with a one-sentence
definition that encompasses
everything WebObjects is about,
this is probably it.
It's software made up of frameworks
and tools that help you build
network applications with data
from multiple data sources.
Well,
this is a long way of saying that really,
WebObjects is an application server.
So this isn't a marketing talk,
but if you're going to build
WebObjects applications,
you need to know why WebObjects
is a good tool for the job.
And there are three main reasons,
and these are really three
themes of the presentation today.
The first is that WebObjects
lets you focus on business logic.
Now, lots of other app environments
force you to focus on things that
you can't add a lot of value to,
like writing the code to
actually access a database,
like JDBC code,
or writing SQL to actually
get data from a database.
But with WebObjects,
we take care of all the minutiae
of app development that you usually
have to do in other environments,
and this lets you focus on
writing your business logic.
And that's why you're writing an
application in the first place.
And like I said,
one of the reasons lots of people like
using WebObjects is it's very productive.
It helps you get to market faster.
We provide a set of rapid prototyping
tools that allows you to have a working
application in literally minutes.
And from there, you iterate and build
this application that,
as Wiley said in the State of the Union,
your 1.0 application is usually better
than a 2.0 application that you would get
in another app development environment.
And the WebObjects development provides
a unique development cycle that
offers more opportunities for feedback
throughout the whole development cycle.
So rather than just gathering
customary requirements at the end
and showing them the final product,
we know that that's not the
reality of software development.
Requirements change,
and WebObjects helps you adapt
to those changing requirements
throughout the development cycle.
So let's back up.
Now most of you probably know
what an application server is,
but let's provide a
broad definition of it.
Well, an application server
provides a service on the web.
This could be a banking service,
or a student tracking service,
or some kind of travel service.
And the reason you're providing it on the
web is that the value of that application
is only as good as many users use it.
So you have tens, hundreds,
maybe thousands of users,
and it doesn't make sense to deploy
this application on the desktop.
Now with WebObjects, of course,
you can deploy distributed
network applications that
run as desktop applications,
but the point is you want to
distribute this to many people.
And the people who use your application,
they might just read the
data in that application,
but most likely they're
actually contributing to the
data in your repositories.
And with WebObjects,
we help you use data from multiple
data repositories and present that in a
meaningful form in your end application.
And these days,
it's very common for applications
to exchange and share data.
And so we're going to
talk about how to do that.
So let's get started.
So we're going to start
with a web application.
data with other applications.
So rather than an application
just living in its own world,
we use web services and other
technologies to communicate
with other applications,
which adds value to all of them.
So if we can come up with a picture
of what an application server is,
this is a very simplified form.
So on the one hand,
we have data repositories.
And on the other hand,
we have WebObjects.
And the important thing to know about
WebObjects is that it doesn't matter
what kind of WebObjects these are.
They can be HTML clients.
They can be swing desktop applications.
They can be Web service clients.
Or almost anything you can
get to through Java objects.
And the role of the application
server is to mediate between the data
sources and between the web clients,
and to help you get data out of
those data sources and present it
to a meaningful form to web clients.
And of course,
an application server relies
on a web server to actually
communicate with the outside world.
So we're going to go back to that
picture throughout the presentation,
so keep it in mind.
So like I said,
when you think of WebObjects, well,
the word "web" probably
connotes HTML and browsers.
But that's not all WebObjects is about.
With WebObjects, out of the box,
you can target almost any
type of network client.
Most commonly,
people target HTML clients, web browsers.
But also,
it's very common to target swing clients.
These are desktop applications
that run on the user's machine,
much like Word or iPhoto
or something like that.
And the reason you would do this
is you want to provide a more rich
user interface than HTML allows.
But also, with WebObjects,
out of the box,
we also allow you to target SOAP clients,
generic XML clients,
and even something called SMILE,
which is the synchronized
multimedia integration language
that's supported by QuickTime,
RealPlayer, other multimedia clients.
And we provide a specialized
framework so you can build very
rich multimedia applications,
standard-based applications
that have all the rich access to
databases that WebObjects provides.
And because WebObjects
is written in Java,
you can target almost any type of
network client that you can get to.
through Java, such as PDF and SVG.
So just like WebObjects helps you target
almost any type of network client,
you can use data from almost
any type of data source.
And out of the box,
we provide connectivity to
JDBC and JNDI data sources.
And other third parties provide
connectivity to other solutions,
such as SAP.
So one of the best parts about WebObjects
is that it allows you to access these
data sources through Java objects.
So rather than have to worry about
writing your own JDBC or JNDI code to
actually connect to these data sources,
we provide abstractions
to these data sources.
And you interact with these objects,
and usually you don't actually
need to interact at all
to make these connections,
these objects which are Java objects.
So you think in Java,
you think at a very high level,
you think in object-oriented terms,
and WebObjects does the work of
connecting to data sources for you.
And just like it takes care of
accessing those data sources,
it also allows you to express
your business logic in Java.
So a common way of expressing business
logic is to do it in the database,
so doing it with stored procedures
and triggers and things like that.
And that locks you into that database.
You have to write in very low-level code.
But with WebObjects,
we allow you to express
that business logic in Java,
which is really a much more pleasant
way to write your business logic.
And how do we do this?
We do this through software that
we call the Enterprise Objects.
And this is kind of the crown jewel
of WebObjects application development.
This is the technology that
helps you access databases,
helps you write your business logic,
and is really the core element
to any WebObjects application.
You're going to become
familiar with these two icons.
The one on the left is
the icon for EOModeler.
And EOModeler is an application
that helps you build EOModels,
which is the icon
represented on the right.
And these EOModels are
descriptions of your data.
They help WebObjects.
They provide WebObjects a mapping between
your relational data and Java objects.
We're going to talk much more
about that in this session.
So let's go into a little more
depth about the three types of most
common types of client applications
you target with WebObjects.
And the first is HTML applications.
And the goal here is you want
to provide dynamic content,
and you want to provide
it to web browsers.
You might have an online catalog,
and you want to provide customers
with a customized look and experience
when they enter your catalog.
With WebObjects,
you build the pages that your
HTML applications express with templates.
And these templates are built on the
ideas in a proven component model.
And what we mean by that is we
spent a long time coming up with
the best way to design these pages.
So you build these templates,
which are based on this model.
And this component model has
a lot of interesting features.
One, the templates you write
are usually reusable,
so you can reuse the same
templates within one application
or even between applications.
So this is part of the way that
we help achieve reusability,
but also help you get to market
faster through reusability.
And since WebObjects 5.1,
we've heard your request,
and we've also-- now we allow you
to integrate your favorite parts
of the Java server pages technology
right with your Web Components.
So if there are parts of
the JSP model that you like,
we allow you to integrate
that with our component model,
so you get the best of both worlds.
And some well-known examples of
HTML WebObjects applications are
Apple's .Mac suite of services,
providing the home page
application and mail,
and also the Apple Store.
So another very newer type,
a very popular type of client
application you can target with
WebObjects is a web service application.
And in web services,
there are two types of applications.
There are web service servers,
so that we say they vend database
content through web services,
which is a set of standard protocols.
But the other part of that is a
web service client that actually
consumes the data that this web
service server vends to you.
And with WebObjects,
we allow you to build both
types of applications.
We allow you to build the
server and the client.
And we do this by putting a layer of
abstraction on top of Apache Access.
Apache Access is open source software
for helping you build web services.
And it's a great set of software,
and we love it,
but we've made it even easier
to use by providing a layer
of abstraction on top of that.
And we've even done a lot of work
to provide you with plug-ins so
that you can serialize WebObjects
objects that you build and
enterprise objects that you build.
So my favorite kind of
WebObjects application actually
is a Java client application.
This is what we call
client applications that
are written in swing.
And the goal here is you want to provide
dynamic content to an application that
runs on the user's machine not in a web
browser but just like an application.
So an application that
the user can double click.
And as of WebObjects 5.2,
we actually allow you to do
this with two architectures.
We officially support the
three-tier architecture
which includes the WebObjects
application server in the middle.
And in this architecture,
the app server mediates
all access to the database.
So it's very secure and you have total
control over what the client sees.
But we also allow you to build two-tier
desktop applications that allow
-- in which the client application
accesses the database directly.
So if you don't want to worry,
if you don't have the need for the
WebObjects app server in the middle,
you can also build that
type of application,
which is great.
My favorite part about WebObjects
Java Client is the dynamic user
interface generation provided by
something we call Direct-to-Java Client.
What does this do?
Well, it allows you to build these
swing desktop applications without
actually writing any of the swing.
We have something that
we call the rule system,
and the rule system helps
Java Client produce these very
rich swing user interfaces.
So we actually have
apps internal at Apple,
Java Client apps,
that don't have any swing code in them,
but they're these very full-featured,
rich desktop applications.
It's a great part of the technology.
And WebObjects Java Client also has a
business logic distribution architecture.
What does this mean?
Well, you have business objects in
any WebObjects application.
And usually,
these business objects just live on
the WebObjects application server.
But when you have a
Java client application,
you have a client that's smart.
Especially these days,
clients are very robust.
They have lots of memory.
They have very fast processors.
So you can actually put some of these
business objects on the client side.
And when you do this,
you increase performance.
There are drawbacks, of course,
because any time you put a
Java object on the client,
it can be easily decompiled
and things like that.
But this business logic distribution
architecture is flexible enough
to allow... So it gives you total
control over how you want to
distribute your business objects.
And in WebObjects 5.2,
we even took care of one of
the most difficult parts,
most tedious parts,
of deploying desktop swing
applications over the net,
and that's deploying
the client application.
So we've integrated WebStart for you,
so without having to configure
JNLP files or do anything,
we just provide a hyperlink
when your application starts up,
the client clicks it,
they automatically get all
the WebStart functionality,
and you don't have to worry about it.
So that's part of the heavy lifting
philosophy that WebObjects takes
care of all the hard work for you.
And so this is an example of
a Java client application.
You can see it looks like
a Mac OS X application.
It assumes the Aqua look and feel.
Now, of course, you can run this on
other Java 2 platforms,
so you run it on Windows,
and you get the Windows look and feel.
And we can edit properties
and edit relationships,
and again,
all of this is done dynamically
on the fly as the user moves
around the application.
So those are the three most common
types of client applications
you can target with WebObjects:
HTML, Swing, and Web Services.
But I said before that WebObjects
was designed to be very flexible,
and allows you to be creative and
to build new kinds of applications.
And one of those that
you're very familiar with,
I'm sure, is the iTunes Music Store.
It's actually a WebObjects 5.2
application on the back end,
and iTunes sends requests to
the WebObjects application,
and this application hands back
XML that iTunes then interprets
and presents to the Music Store.
And it's actually built with a lot of
our direct web technologies in the back.
It's very cool stuff.
That's just an idea of the flexibility
of the WebObjects framework.
It allows you to do
almost anything you want,
build any kind of network application.
So if you attended the
WebObjects State of the Union,
you're familiar with our
new documentation site,
which just went live yesterday.
And it's actually,
the pages are all static pages,
but these pages come from
a WebObjects application.
So at Apple,
we have this running application,
and a couple times a day,
we ask the application to generate a
static version of all of its pages.
So we create this virtual site map,
and we traverse each of the directories
and each of the nodes on this site,
and generate static
versions of the HTML pages.
So if you attended the
WebObjects State of the Union,
you're familiar with our
new documentation site,
which just went live yesterday.
And it's actually, the pages come from a
WebObjects application.
So at Apple,
we have this running application,
and a couple times a day,
we ask the application to generate
static versions of all of its pages.
So at Apple,
we have this running application,
and a couple times a day,
we generate static
versions of the HTML pages.
what this means is we get all
the features or most of the
features of an application server,
but with static HTML.
So you notice if I look at
the Cocoa documentation,
I can sort this list by simply
clicking a column header.
Now, what I'm doing,
I'm not talking to an application server,
I'm just asking for a static
HTML page that's been pre-generated.
So this gives us the advantage
of we can deploy these pages,
we can serve these pages with
Apache without having to worry
about the overhead of actually
deploying an application server.
So that's just another example
of the flexibility of WebObjects
and some different kinds of
applications you can build with it.
So now I'd like to bring
Bill Baumgartner on stage to actually
show you an example of how quickly
it is to get up and running with
building a WebObjects application.
So I'd like to show you two applications.
One of the interesting sort of
chicken-the-egg problems that every
developer faces when you're starting up
a project is you may have your database
sort of kind of initialized in there,
but you don't have any data in it.
And because you don't
have any data in it,
then it's hard to build the app.
And you kind of want to
solve both these problems.
So one of the focuses of the tools,
and you'll see this throughout all
of the Xcode discussions as well,
is that we want to keep you productive.
We want to keep you moving
forward in your projects.
We want to make you happy developers.
And I apologize,
I'm a little new to Apple,
so I'm learning the
appropriate marketing term.
So I guess, our tools kick ass?
Okay, so I got that in.
Good.
: I'm going to show
you how they kick ass.
I guess I'm only supposed
to use it like three times,
so there's one more.
Oh, I'm sorry.
Wrong menu item.
Yeah,
so I'm going to create a new project now.
Thank you.
And I'm going to create a
new direct web application.
And I'm going to not use that name.
I will call it VideoStore.
And my goal here is
I have a video database.
Now, if I was into typing in demos,
I would have gone into eoModeler and
actually reverse engineered the database.
But I've already done that.
So I'm going to take already existing
models of my database and just
build an application on top of that.
So we'll call it VideoWeb,
because we're being arrested.
And we will choose the default actions,
once again, emphasizing productivity.
Our default behavior just
moves you to your goal.
And we will add a
couple of eoModels here,
which this is interesting.
Notice I'm actually
adding multiple models.
What this means is that, again,
these tools,
what I'm showing you is very simple.
However, the implications are complex.
You can have multiple databases.
You can have data across those databases.
You can have relationships
between data on a Sybase database,
an Oracle database, a front base,
and LDAP.
And I'm going to choose the neutral look.
So let me go ahead and
just create the project,
let it build and run,
and we'll see what we get.
Excuse me.
Now,
what's interesting about this demo is
actually the tools I'm using here are
the same stuff that's used to build
things like the Music Store and other
wonderful technologies out there.
So here's my application.
It's already up and running.
Let me go ahead and log in.
We don't take care of
security on that page,
by the way.
So that's something you should
put that on your to-do list.
So as you can see, though,
now that I'm in my application,
I've got all of my stuff from
my database is just showing up,
all my entities,
which correspond to tables.
I can search for things.
I can actually even create, say,
a new movie, or I could drill down
and inspect a movie.
Now I'm happy as a developer
because I can go in and I can
start really working with my data,
and I'm five minutes into my project.
Now, of course, HTML as a user interface
is somewhat lacking.
And as Brent mentioned, we also do Java.
So let me actually create a new project.
And this time I'm going to
choose direct to Java client.
And we'll call this Video Web J,
continuing with our
tradition of originality.
And again, I'm running through the
default answers here.
grabbing all the frameworks,
adding the same two EO models.
I'm going to steal them
from the other project.
In this case,
I'm continuing down my default.
And that last screen,
let me actually go back.
This is kind of neat.
Web start.
So this will automatically create
the little thing that you can just
kind of shove on a web page or send
an email to start the application.
It makes distribution very easy.
So we'll go ahead and, again,
we're following the default
[Transcript missing]
So what's actually happening here is,
of course, the application's building,
et cetera.
This is a direct-to-Java client.
So now as the application launches,
what you'll see is a user
interface that was dynamically
generated purely from a data model.
So there's a bunch of rules
in the rule system that say,
okay,
if there's an entity that has certain
kinds of attributes that are strings,
then you can go ahead and create a search
form automatically that actually allows
for very rich interaction with the data.
Now, I look at this immediately,
and I go, you know,
I'm doing a video store.
The first thing I want to do when
I'm administrating this data is
I really want to focus on movies.
I'm less interested about my customers
because I don't have any yet.
So there's an assistant,
and through the assistant,
you can actually go in and
modify the rules that are used
to drive this application.
So the first thing I'm going to do is
I'm going to go to my main entities,
and I'm going to bump movies
up to the top of the list.
And since I'm not a very
good video store owner,
I'm going to just remove talent
because I don't like actors.
So we'll go ahead and apply
this and restart my application.
And as you can see already,
my movies are at the
beginning of the list,
and I have no talent in my list.
Hopefully I have talent.
And for searching movies, you know,
I really want to be
able to do it by rating.
I have a lot of customers
that want to come in and they
want to get Finding Nemo.
I had to work that in, too.
More marketing.
I'm learning.
And so they want to be able to search by,
say, the rating of the movie.
So I can easily come in and I can say,
okay, whenever I'm querying for a movie,
and this is the whole rule system,
I want to search by rating.
And I really don't want
to search by plot summary.
That just doesn't make any sense.
So again,
I'll apply and I'll restart the app.
And I can come in and I can search
for movies that are rated G.
And it'll go off, and there's all my
movies that are rated G.
Notice Finding Nemo's not in the list.
We need to update this database.
But anyway, as you can see, I've,
in five minutes or so,
have created two applications that
allow you to work fully and intimately
with the data in your data stores.
And what this means for you as a
developer is that you can get up to speed
really quickly and get into the client
or the customer or your user or your mom,
if you're building an app for her,
face and say, is this what you meant?
Is this what you wanted?
Let's go interactive on this.
Let's push our product
ahead very rapidly.
And as was indicated earlier,
what that means is the 1.0
with our stuff usually is like
a 3.0 with everyone else's,
because you're learning all the time
through the development process.
Now, these tools,
a lot of people look at things like this,
and they're scared by it.
They're worried that they're
going to get locked into our way
of presenting the information.
That's not true.
With the rules system,
you could actually build
your own super spiffy,
say, revenue display widget,
and then in the rules system, say,
anywhere a revenue is displayed,
use this widget.
So we encourage reuse throughout
all of these tools as well.
And then, of course,
once you have this administrator,
you can build your own.
And then once you have
this administrative app,
you start building the
app facing the user,
then you can reuse all that code
and the business logic again.
So we kick ass because you're productive,
and we like to support that.
There's my third one.
So I'll turn it over to Brent again.
Thanks, Bill.
And one thing Bill was emphasizing there
at the end is that we just showed you an
example of the rapid development tools
and frameworks that WebObjects provides.
And those tools do everything for you,
but we also let you do everything
on your own if you want to.
And there are good reasons for
starting with both approaches
to WebObjects development.
So now we're going to take a
minute and talk about all of
the tools that we provide,
the great set of tools we provide
to build these applications.
So Bill showed you two tools,
three tools.
He showed you two.
Project Builder, and he showed you the
Direct-to-Java Client Assistant.
And those are just two
tools in the suite.
So Project Builder.
Well, this is very important
because this allows you to
organize your project files.
It provides new project assistants to
help you get up and running with any
of the WebObjects application types.
It's the application that you use
to actually compile your project.
And we provide a front end to JDB,
the Java debugger,
so that you can graphically...
debug your WebObjects application,
which is a Java application.
We also provide CVS integration,
so you don't have to resort to
the command line to get full
source control management.
And we provide documentation lookup,
so you can double click on a
WebObjects method or class name,
and right there in Project Builder,
see the description
for that class method,
which is pretty cool.
And Project Builder also is part of the
equation that we label Rapid Turnaround.
And Rapid Turnaround is a feature
in WebObjects that allows you to
make changes to your applications,
usually to the user interface,
to save those changes and to see them
reflected in the running application
without having to recompile.
And there are other tools that work with
Project Builder to make this possible,
which we'll talk about in a minute.
So I talked about EOModeler.
And EOModeler is really the most
important tool in WebObjects development,
because it allows you
to build data models.
And as you saw,
by simply providing WebObjects
a description of your data,
you can actually get full-featured
running applications for free.
But even if you're not using the
Rapid Development tools and frameworks
to build WebObjects applications,
you really still need a data model,
because this data model is how you
provide the data to the templates,
the visual pages that you construct.
So how do you build these data models?
Well, EOModeler is very smart,
and it will actually reverse engineer a
model for you from an existing database.
So a lot of projects
start from existing data.
So you simply point
EOModeler to your database.
And like I said, out of the box, this is,
we support JDBC and JNDI.
And it looks at all the tables and
all the columns and all the joins,
and it creates entities, attributes,
and relationships from
all that information.
So you don't actually have to worry
about creating the model in many cases.
You may want to make tweaks to it.
But if you don't have a database,
you need to create a schema.
And EOModeler can actually help
you think about that schema
in entity relationship terms,
and then it will write that schema
back to the database for you.
So it's a great data modeling tool also.
And we also think of EOModeler as a front
end to the Enterprise Object Frameworks,
because it actually allows you to
configure a lot of the more sophisticated
characteristics of things in EOF,
which we'll talk about more in a second.
So what does EOModeler do?
Well, it helps you map relational
data structures to Java objects.
We said that with WebObjects,
WebObjects allows you to build your
business logic in Java objects.
But in order to do that,
we have to have a way to get the
changes that you make to your
Java objects back into the data source.
So we need a description.
We need a mapping of that.
And that's what EOModeler does.
It helps you map entities to tables,
attributes to columns,
and relationships to joins.
Another great feature of
EOF and EOModeler is that
you can model inheritance.
So as a Java developer,
it's common to build inheritance
hierarchies into your application.
So you might have a person superclass,
and you might have
concrete subclasses of it,
such as student, teacher, administrator,
if you're at an educational institution.
Well, this is a very natural
way to think in Java,
in object-oriented terms.
But wouldn't it also be nice if you could
translate that hierarchy into something
that persists in a relational database?
Well, we fully support that with EOF,
and EOModeler allows you to map
your Java inheritance hierarchies
to your relational tables.
And EOModeler also helps you
build fetch specifications,
which are descriptions of
the data you want to fetch,
which also usually include
things like sort orderings.
And you can do all of
these things in code.
In fact,
you can even build models in code,
but EOModeler is,
we provide it because it's a lot
easier to do it with a graphical tool.
So if you're building HTML applications,
you need to build these page
templates I was talking about.
So we provide a tool
that helps you do that.
It's called WebObjects Builder,
and fundamentally it's an HTML editor,
but its specialty is that it helps
you write these page templates.
And these page templates in
WebObjects are made up of
something we call dynamic elements.
And a dynamic element is
just what it sounds like.
It's an HTML element whose values and
characteristics are resolved at runtime.
And WebObjects Builder has collections
of these dynamic elements on palettes.
So you drag out these elements,
you put them on your templates,
and you connect them up to
your enterprise objects.
And so that's how we say that
WebObjects Builder is integrated
with enterprise objects.
It knows about the entities
in your data model.
It knows about their attributes.
It knows about their relationships.
These are things that
your EO model provides.
And WebObjects Builder also plays a part
in this thing we call rapid turnaround.
So in many cases,
you can make changes to the
HTML templates you build in WebObjects,
save them,
refresh the page in the client browser,
and see those changes reflected
without having to recompile,
rebuild your application.
So this is one way that WebObjects
helps you get to market faster
by removing some of these steps
in the development process.
Thank you.
So we touched on rapid development,
and rapid development is one of
the coolest features of WebObjects,
and it includes a number of tools.
So there are three types of client
applications that you can target with
the rapid development frameworks.
One is an HTML client,
other is a Java client,
a third is a web services client.
And each of these types of client
applications has its own assistant.
And these assistants are
front ends to the rule system.
So the rule system is,
we consider it kind of like a black box.
It's very smart,
it knows how to do all these things,
but to interact with it,
you need to write these rules.
These rules can kind of
be hard to learn to write.
So what these assistants do is,
they provide valid configurations
and valid combinations of these
rules that you can just choose
in a graphical user interface,
which has the result of
writing these rules for you.
And this enables code-free,
rule-driven applications.
So how do these tools all work together?
Well,
we divide the WebObjects development
workflow into three general phases.
The first is a data access phase.
Second is the business logic phase.
And third is presentation logic.
And each of the tools has a specialized
role in each one of these phases.
So in the data access phase, of course,
the goal is to get data or
get a description of the
data in a JDBC database,
a JNDI directory, into an EO model file.
And you use EO Modeler to do this.
So that's really the first step.
And once you have this
description of your data,
then you're ready to
write your business logic.
And in WebObjects,
you write your business logic in Java.
So you edit your Java files
in Project Builder.
So this is the business
logic phase of the workflow.
And after you've done that,
you work on your presentation logic.
So you use WebObjects Builder
to build HTML templates.
You use Direct to Java Client
to build swing applications,
but you can also use Interface Builder.
This is the same Interface Builder
that you use to build Carbon and
Cocoa and other applications.
So you can use Direct to
Java Client to build Carbon and
Cocoa applications for Mac OS X.
But we've actually extended it.
So when you build a Java Client
interface in Interface Builder,
we actually write out the swing for you.
So in this case,
we're not dynamically generating
the user interface on the fly as the
user moves around the application,
but we're actually using a
chunk of static swing that
Interface Builder generates.
And of course, you can integrate both the
static interface and the dynamic
interface in the application.
So if you need very precise
control over one particular
window in your application,
you can use Direct to Java Client
to build a dynamic interface.
particular window in your application,
you can do that in Interface Builder.
And finally, if you're building a
Web Services application,
whether you're building the
server side or the client side,
if you're building the server side,
you use something we call
the Web Services Assistant.
If you're building a client,
you can build browser-based
Web Service clients with
the WebObjects frameworks,
but you might also be interested
in building a Web Service client
to target something like Sherlock.
And so we showed this workflow
and we showed the arrows going
from one side to the other,
but that doesn't mean that you have
to finish the data access phase before
you move on to the business logic
phase and then finish the business
logic before the presentation logic.
You can go back and make changes
in any one of these realms,
but this illustration is just
here so you get an idea of
how the tools work together.
Okay, so we've talked about,
we've shown you a demo
of HTML applications and
Java client applications,
but what about web services?
I'm going to bring the world's
foremost Jamaican-Chinese
WebObjects developer on stage,
Ron Lusang, to show us a demo of
Web Services with WebObjects.
Cool.
Thanks, Brent.
So first off,
you guys know about web services and
how Brent explained that with Access,
we're able to bring web
services to WebObjects,
or vend web services through WebObjects.
On top of that,
we've added a technology that
we call direct-to-web services,
which makes it even easier to start
building a web services server.
So I'm going to start a new project,
and I'll choose direct-to-web
services as my application type.
And I'll choose a silly name,
as I prefer to.
Again,
go through all of the default settings.
Choose the movies model.
And I'll just build and
launch the application.
So what it's going to do is put together
a list of the entities in my model.
[Transcript missing]
And poof.
You can see here,
we see we have a service.
And we take the approach of being
paranoid for our web services.
So none of the services
are turned on by default.
So nobody can go in and start sending
random soap to these services.
Anything that's not specifically
enabled is disallowed.
So we'll go ahead and enable
our special default web service,
called appropriately
enough default web service.
So we'll add an entity to our default
web service as far as public entities go.
Once I've added this entity,
you can look over here
in the service list.
And we'll add a couple of operations.
So what we've done here is go through
the entity that we've added and looked
at what fetch specifications are defined,
as well as just what arguments should
be exposed as web service arguments.
So we haven't written any code yet,
and all we've done is focus
on our business logic,
and already we can already
publish a web service.
Let's start by just moving
a couple of entities out.
I just want to search
on rating for my movies,
let's say.
We'll remove these.
We can change what arguments
are sent to the web service,
and what return values are sent
back to the web service client.
Let's just say we're
interested in the title,
the rating again, and we can also,
from this list here,
choose to see the studio name.
We can go through relationships.
And we can also, from this list here,
choose to see the studio name.
when we're returning values
from the web service.
So all of this again is going
through the rule system and changing
values only in the rule system.
You don't have to write any code to
change the settings for your web service.
Let's go ahead and return
or try and test this.
One of the things about web services,
by the way, you really have to put
together a WSDL file,
a web services description language file,
saying what arguments you expect and
what results the client can expect to
get back from invoking a web service.
Rather than have to
write all that for you,
or write all of that yourself,
Direct Web Services generates
all of this lovely XML for you.
So you can go ahead and
be productive immediately,
like testing the application.
So we'll search for all rated G movies,
and we'll get back a list
of all the rated G movies.
You could look for PG and test it.
So one of the things that you'll
also notice is we haven't had to go
through and write any access code.
We haven't had to do anything
actually parsing the WSDL ourselves.
We figured out the direct web services
assistant can actually parse the
WSDL and put up a dynamic UI so that we
already have something that we can use
to invoke the web service and test it.
If we go back, you can see if we add,
say, title as an input argument,
We get rating and title
as the UI to test with.
So we can look for all PG movies.
Actually, one other thing,
we can change the operator that is used.
So we can look for case insensitive like.
[Transcript missing]
And there aren't any
G movies to start with us.
So that's a simple example of how
quickly you can get up and running
with a web service application using
the direct web services technology.
It's very simple, very easy to use,
and you should use it.
Back to Brent.
Thank you, Ron.
So there's something we need to emphasize
about the demos you've seen today.
Now, they demonstrate that you can
go very far in a WebObjects
application without writing any code.
And that's true.
Everything you saw here today
is what you can get in the
trial version of WebObjects
and in the box when you buy it.
But WebObjects is not a toy.
It's a programmer's tool.
You really need to be
a programmer to use it.
Now, we take care of a lot of the
difficult things for you.
So you don't have to be a DBA to
write a WebObjects application
that uses multiple databases.
But you do need to be a programmer,
a Java programmer,
to really build a usable application.
So you can go far,
but we don't want to give you the
sense that you can go all the way
in application development with
WebObjects without knowing how
to write a little bit of code.
So after saying that,
we need to talk about how all
of this is how we make objects.
So let's talk about the building blocks
behind every WebObjects application.
And the building blocks are
something we call frameworks.
Well, what's a framework?
A framework is software,
and it provides a lot of pre-built
functionality that you plug into.
Another way of thinking about
this is a framework knows
how to do a lot of things.
The WebObjects frameworks
know how to access databases.
They know how to generate HTML.
They know how to do web services stuff.
But they don't know what to do.
They don't know what you want them to do.
So you have to provide information.
You have to tell them,
tell the frameworks what kind of
data you want to fetch or what
your page templates look like.
So a key idea about frameworks
is that they do all the driving
and all the heavy lifting.
Well, what does this mean?
Well,
they know how to do a lot of things.
And one of the most common obstacles
that new WebObjects developers face
is that they start writing all this
fancy code to do all of these things
that they think they need to do,
when actually the frameworks
do all of this for you.
So you need to learn to trust
that these frameworks actually
know what they're doing,
and that your goal,
your role as a WebObjects developer is
to understand the frameworks well enough
to know how to harness the functionality
they provide so you write less code.
And when you write less code,
you write less bugs,
and you write a better application.
So the WebObjects frameworks
have been around for a long time.
WebObjects was actually the first
application server a long time ago.
And because it's been
around for a long time,
these frameworks have had a lot
of years to get really good,
to the point that we say they
incorporate a lot of the best practices
of object-oriented programming.
And they actually share a lot of
these best practices with the Koko,
Apple's other object-oriented framework
for building desktop applications.
And I want to talk about three of
these because they're really important.
One is key value coding.
When you start reading the
WebObjects documentation,
you're going to see
this all over the place.
And you look at the
API reference and talk to people,
and they're going to talk
about key value coding.
Well, what is this?
Well, it simply encompasses the classic
object-oriented design paradigm to
encapsulate the thing that varies.
Well, what varies in an application?
What varies is how your objects
provide access to their data.
They might provide access to their
data through an accessor method,
preferably,
or through an instance variable.
And the name of that accessor method or
instance variable could be different.
Well, what key value coding does,
it abstracts away all of that
diversity in how objects present
their data and allows you to
access data by key or by name.
And as you'll see later on,
this is very powerful because if
we have business objects that have
very complex relationships in them,
we can actually get to the data in
those different objects simply by
traversing what we call a key path.
And this is all enabled
through key value coding,
name-based lookup.
Another important idea is delegation.
It's kind of a complex thing,
and you don't need to know
about it to get started.
But we said that the WebObjects
frameworks are very flexible.
And one way they're flexible
is that the class designers,
the people who design the
classes in these frameworks,
provide opportunities for you
to customize these classes.
And they do it through
something we call delegation.
And this is a way for the
class designer to say,
at this point in this object's execution,
I want to provide other developers
a way to intercept things and
provide custom functionality.
So rather than requiring you to
actually subclass one of our classes
and override a bunch of things,
we provide things called delegates,
which provides you a
great deal of flexibility.
: And Model-View-Controller is another
key idea in the WebObjects frameworks.
And this is a paradigm you're
probably all familiar with.
And in WebObjects development,
it means the same thing.
It means that we divide,
we think about the objects in
WebObjects in three different realms.
The model realm, which is your data and
your business logic.
The view realm,
which is what your user actually
sees and interacts with.
And the controller,
which is the glue between the two.
So let's talk about three
of the frameworks that every
WebObjects application,
no matter what type of
client you're targeting,
will use.
And the first is the
foundation framework.
This is a set of powerful,
fast collection and utility classes,
things for managing your
application's data structures.
It's important to understand
that the foundation framework
doesn't replace the JDK classes.
It's actually built on top of them,
and it complements the JDK classes.
But like I said,
WebObjects has been around a long time,
and was actually not
written in Java originally.
So a lot of these classes
predate a lot of the JDK classes.
And they're very mature,
and provide a lot of
really great functionality,
a lot of which you actually don't
get in the standard Java classes.
The foundation framework also provides
an infrastructure for notification.
In a WebObjects application,
you have possibly hundreds or thousands
of objects running at runtime,
and usually they need to
communicate with each other.
Maybe a user makes a
change to a business.
Well, chances are that other objects
depend on the state of that object.
Well,
a notification architecture allows those
objects to communicate in a way so that
the objects are very loosely coupled.
So we have another
object that we introduce,
which is called a notification center.
And objects tell the notification
center when something,
when their state changes,
or when a certain event occurs.
And other objects tell the notification
center that they want to know about
when other objects change their state.
So in the end,
we have this dynamic neural network.
And we have a very simple system
of objects communicating with
each other without directly
having references to them.
This is one of those other great best
practices of OO programming that the
WebObjects frameworks incorporate.
Foundation framework also provides
basic infrastructure for validating
the data in your objects.
And WebObjects 5.2 includes
XML serialization classes that
make it very easy to serialize
WebObjects and enterprise objects.
So the WebObjects framework.
Well, this is a framework that bootstraps
all types of WebObjects applications.
So whether you're building an HTML,
a swing,
or a web service WebObjects application,
this framework helps
you get up and running.
And it manages something called
the request response loop.
Clients send requests into
your application server.
The WebObjects framework helps
you dissect that request,
and in the end,
after all your business logic
and application logic have made
the decisions they need to make,
it helps package up a response and
sends it back out to the client.
We talked about the page templates,
and the infrastructure for that is
rooted in the WebObjects framework.
And the most important thing
the WebObjects framework
does is it manages state.
We all know that the web
is inherently stateless.
There are no facilities for
tracking state on the web.
So that's really what one of the
main roles of an app server is,
to provide state.
And there are three realms of state.
There's global application state,
data that you want all of
your users in every session
in your application to share.
There is per session, or per user state.
So if you want to provide a customized,
personalized experience to each
user as they enter your site,
you need to store the
state for that session.
And even within a given page,
you may need to keep track of a session
if a user requests that page again.
So the WebObjects framework manages
state in those three realms.
So we introduced the
Enterprise Objects Frameworks before.
So if you're having a hard time
understanding of what this actually is,
there are two industry standard
terms that will give you a
sense of what it accomplishes.
One is entity relational modeling,
the other is object relational mapping.
And these are ways of thinking of
your data in higher level terms
than tables and columns and joins,
thinking about them more
abstractly as an objects.
And like we said,
this takes care of writing all of
that low level code that you as a
human shouldn't ever have to write.
So the framework takes care of it.
It's much more reliable than
you writing four joins to
traverse a complex relationship.
And it allows you to
focus on business objects,
like we said.
So one thing you have to
trust about using EOF,
that's what we call it,
is that Java invocations you make,
so invocations you make on your objects,
actually result in the end in
certain database operations,
such as selects, inserts, and updates.
So once you learn to trust that,
you're going to get a lot further
as a WebObjects developer.
So there are two really
important terms in EOF.
We talked about business objects.
Well, your business objects are
actually instances of something
we call an enterprise object.
And these enterprise objects
live in an editing context.
An editing context is a container.
And I bring these up now
because when you start actually
writing code in an application,
these are two of the types of objects
you'll be interacting with most often.
So this is a really
important set of frameworks.
So we have two slides on it.
There we go.
So it also includes a
high-level qualifier language.
So when you need to write a
description and tell EOF what
kind of data you want to fetch,
well,
we allow you to do this in Java with
a very English-like syntax.
Rather than have to worry about
the joins that you need to write,
and all of the appropriate SQL,
you write in very high-level
qualifier objects that then get
transposed down to the database layer.
We manage joins for you, like I said,
and EOF introduces the idea of keypath.
So a very quick example,
if we have an address object
referred to by the address key,
and we have a street
property in that object,
we can get to that data simply
by using this chain of keys.
And this is all enabled
by key value coding,
like we discussed before.
And EOF provides automatic transparent
access to multiple data sources.
So if you want your business
objects to be composed of
data from an Oracle database
and a front-based database,
they can do this, and you don't really
have to think about it.
And EOF includes a validation
infrastructure that allows you to
provide validation on properties,
so on the data in your objects,
and you might want to validate
that data at certain points in
the application's execution.
If a user requests to save data,
you want to make sure you want
to validate the data before it
actually gets to the database,
and EOF provides this infrastructure.
And like I said,
there's also very rich support for
inheritance in enterprise objects.
So we talked about frameworks,
so where does your code,
how does your code work
with the frameworks?
Well, if the enterprise objects
framework is on the database side,
and the web objects framework
is on the client side,
your business logic plugs in to EOF,
and your application logic plugs
into the web objects framework.
And in a running application,
clients send requests in,
they come in through the web server,
which forwards it to
the application server,
the WebObjects framework
takes over and helps you make
sense of that client request.
And in conjunction with your application
logic and your business logic,
perhaps that user requested data,
and if so, UF will help you get that
data out of a database,
and put that data,
get that data in the form of objects,
which you can then,
you pass back through your application,
you use that,
those objects to populate these
page templates that you write,
and then the WebObjects
framework ultimately packages
that back up in a response that
gets sent out to the client.
We talked about rapid development
and we're running a little short.
So, behind the scenes.
So this is one of the examples that
ships with the WebObjects product.
It's called iShax.
It allows -- it's a front end to the real
estate database that you saw in -- no,
you didn't.
It's a front end to a database
we ship as one of the examples,
which is a real estate database.
So how does this page happen?
What's going on behind the scenes
to actually produce this page?
Well, the first layer is HTML.
There's -- this page is made of HTML.
Well, where does this HTML come from?
Well, it comes from one of
these WoE components.
And this component happens to
be the search page component.
And this component includes
a bunch of dynamic elements.
The values, the content of these dynamic
elements is resolved at runtime.
So, what components?
We touched on briefly before.
They're page templates.
They're made up of standard HTML,
JavaScript, and other web content,
but most importantly, they're made up of
these dynamic elements.
More components are
reusable and nestable,
so you can reuse a component
within your application.
It's very common to have a common page
wrapper component that all of the pages,
all of the components
in your application use.
You only have to write
that component once,
and you can put it in
all of your templates,
so you get the same -- that same
feel without writing more code.
Components are synchronized,
and they communicate with one another.
Each component has a
Java object behind it,
and that's really key.
So this isn't just -- a component
is not just a set of HTML with
a little bit of JavaScript or,
you know, maybe even SQL in it,
like other kinds of component models,
but there's actually a
Java object behind each component.
So this allows you to store state
and allows you to communicate
with other Java objects,
such as your business objects.
And what components have full access
to session and application data,
so if you need to provide a customized,
personalized experience
on a particular page,
you have access to a user session.
So these dynamic element things,
like we said, they're HTML tags.
Their characteristics and values
are determined at runtime.
Let's look at an example.
So in that iShax example page that
we showed you a few slides ago,
there's a pop-up menu.
And the pop-up menu allows you to
narrow down the scope of your search.
And it allows you to choose a state.
So each dynamic element has a
number of different attributes.
And you bind these attributes to
values in your business objects,
static values maybe, whatever.
So in this case,
we're calling out the value attribute.
And the value attribute
is bound to a key path.
We talked about key paths before.
So in this case,
it's looking for an object
that's resolved by the name key.
And it's looking for the
abbreviation of that state,
such as CA for California.
So at runtime, that list,
that 50 state list, element list,
will not include the
full name of the state,
but rather the abbreviation.
Okay, so we talked about development.
We're almost done here.
But once you're done
developing your application,
you actually need to deploy it.
And if you attended the
WebObjects State of the Union,
we introduced new ways of
deploying your applications
in Panther Server with JBoss.
And there are two sessions
dedicated specifically to this,
so please go see them.
But I want to cover two
very quick things today.
There are two types of deployment.
There's a standard WebObjects
deployment using our tools
and deployment infrastructure.
And there's servlet deployment,
which allows you to deploy
your WebObjects application
as a servlet in Tomcat,
in JBoss, WebLogic, etc.
Okay, so in sum, with WebObjects,
you write less code,
you get a lot of functionality
out of the box for free,
the objects you write
are usually reusable,
The Enterprise Objects
Framework allows you to build
database-independent applications.
So you might start developing
your application on one database
and move to another production
database when you're finished,
when you deploy.
We have a lot of innovative,
very cool technologies,
like the rapid development
tools and frameworks for
doing rule-based development.
And we provide a number of
flexible deployment options.
So how do you get started?
There are thousands and thousands of
pages of documentation on WebObjects.
We suggest getting started
with these four first.
Web applications will take you
through building an HTML application.
It includes a number of tutorials.
And the ideas that you learn in
there are really applicable to all
kinds of WebObjects applications.
So if you're developing a
web service application,
you should still start with that book to
familiarize yourself with the concepts.
And using EOModeler not only
teaches you how to use EOModeler,
but it also introduces a lot of
the important concepts in the
Enterprise Objects Framework.
And if you want to learn more about the
dynamic elements that we provide for you,
you can go to the EOModeler website.
There's the dynamic elements reference.
And if you're unfamiliar
with Project Builder,
or even if you are familiar with it,
there are a few things that are
unique to WebObjects development
that a lot of people are
confused about at the beginning.
So go consult that specialized
Project Builder for WebObjects
developers document to clear it all up.
Who to contact?
We always love to hear your feedback,
your ideas for the product.
So, webobjects@apple.com is probably
the best way to get a hold of us.